6 New Englandish
From BBCLearningEnglish.com
Hello, this is 6 Minute English from BBCLearningEnglish. I'm Phil
And I'm Beth. Do you like honey fill?
I use it a lot in cooking, so yes
Well, the relationship between humans, honey and the bees which make it goes back thousands of years
Priced for its taste and medicinal properties in ancient times honey was known as liquid gold
But now thanks to modern farming methods
Population of many insects including bees are in decline
Sersha, a worried listener from London called BBC World Service Programm crowd science about the problem
I'm Sersha from UK and my question is, can honey help save bees?
I've been vegan for about nine years and I don't eat honey myself
But I still have a question mark around it because I know there are bee populations of declining
Sersha is a vegan, someone who doesn't eat anything which comes from animals
Not just meat but things like milk, eggs and honey too
Although Sersha doesn't eat honey herself, she says there's a question mark around eating honey
The phrase a question mark around something means there's doubt or uncertainty about something
And what Sersha is uncertain about is whether eating honey might actually save bees
So, would it be better for declining bee populations if more people ate honey?
That's what we'll be discussing using some useful new words and phrases
Plus, you'll find all the vocabulary from this episode on our website
BBCLearningEnglish.com
But before that I have a question for you, Phil
The buzzing sound bees are fangs for is made by flapping their forewings incredibly fast
But how fast?
Do honey bees flap their wings A?
90 times per second
B 190 times per second
Or see two hundred and ninety times per second
Well, I have absolutely no idea so I'm going to guess a hundred and ninety times per second
Okay, well we'll find out the answer later in the programme
We've been talking about honey bees but these are just one of the twenty thousand species of bee which exist around the world
In fact, honey bees are one of the most widespread insects on the planet and not endangered at all
But the picture isn't so good for wild bees including the Bumblebee
As biologist Dave Galson from the University of Sussex
Explain to BBC World Service programme crowd science
In the UK we have twenty six Bumblebee species but three of gone extinct
Many of the others and I cling on in little isolated pockets of good habitat
Honey bees have beekeepers to look after them
But nobody's looking out for the wild bees
Three of the twenty six species of British Bumblebee have gone extinct
And Dave says other species are clinging on meaning barely continuing to survive with great effort
This happens in isolated pockets small areas of habitat in which a particular insect or animal can survive
So while honey bees may not be endangered, lots of other bee species are
And this is bad news because we rely on insects to pollinate crops and to keep ecosystems functioning
That's right, Beth 87% of all plants species need insects for pollination
So without them, most plants on earth would disappear which would obviously be catastrophic
But according to Dave Galson, pollination is just one of the many things bees do for us
As he explained to BBC World Services crowd science
That isn't the only thing that insects are doing
And there are much less glamorous less well known things like recycling, k-poop
And helping to keep the soil healthy and helping to control crop pests and so on
All of which are also really important and we kind of take them for granted or just oblivious that they're even happening
Recycling, k-poop and keeping the soil healthy are two important jobs bees do which we take for granted
If you take something for granted, you've failed to value or appreciate something which benefits you
We humans are oblivious, meaning unaware or unmindful of the many things bees do to support life on earth
So while eating more honey, probably won't do much to save wild bees
There are things you can do such as growing bee friendly plants which flower in spring like lavender
Okay Phil, I think it's time to reveal the answer to my question
I asked you how many times bees flap their wings per second
You said 190 which was the correct answer well done
Okay, let's recap the vocabulary we've learnt starting with vegan someone who doesn't consume any animal products
If you say there's a question mark around something, you mean there's some doubt or uncertainty about it
If an animal species is clinging on, it's holding onto existence with great effort
I selected pockets refer to small areas of habitat in which a particular insect or animal can survive
To take something for granted means to not appreciate or show gratitude for something which helps you
And finally the adjective oblivious means unaware
Once again, our six minutes are up, but if you're keen for more then head over to our website
BBCLearningEnglish.com and download the worksheet and try the quiz on this episode
Goodbye for now
Goodbye